---
layout: post
date: 
title: "SRCU state double scan"
comments: true
categories: [rcu, srcu, synchronization]
---
The SRCU flavor of RCU uses per-cpu counters to detect that every CPU has
passed through a quiescent state for a particular SRCU lock instance
(`srcu_struct`).

There's are total of 4 counters per-cpu. One pair for locks, and another for
unlocks. You can think of the SRCU instance to be split into 2 parts. The
readers sample `srcu_idx` and decided which part to use. Each part corresponds
to one pair of lock and unlock counters. A reader increments a part's lock
counter during locking and likewise for unlock.

During an update, the updater flips `srcu_idx` (thus attempting to force new
readers to use the other part) and waits for the lock/unlock counters on the
previous value of `srcu_idx` to match.  Once the sum of the lock counters of
all CPUs match that of unlock, the system knows all pre-existing read-side
critical sections have completed.

Things are not that simple, however. It is possible that a reader samples the
`srcu_idx`, but before it can increment the lock counter corresponding to it,
it undergoes a long delay. We thus we end up in a situation where there are
readers in both `srcu_idx = 0` and `srcu_idx = 1`.

To prevent such a situation, a writer has to wait for readers corresponding to
both `srcu_idx = 0` and `srcu_idx = 1` to complete. This depicted with 'A MUST'
in the below pseudo-code:
```
        reader 1        writer                        reader 2
        -------------------------------------------------------
        // read_lock
        // enter
        Read: idx = 0;
        <long delay>    // write_lock
                        // enter
                        wait_for lock[1]==unlock[1]
                        idx = 1; /* flip */
                        wait_for lock[0]==unlock[0]
                        done.
                                                      Read: idx = 1;
        lock[0]++;
                                                      lock[1]++;
                        // write_lock
                        // return
        // read_lock
        // return
        /**** NOW BOTH lock[0] and lock[1] are non-zero!! ****/
                        // write_lock
                        // enter
                        wait_for lock[0]==unlock[0] <- A MUST!
                        idx = 0; /* flip */
                        wait_for lock[1]==unlock[1] <- A MUST!
```
NOTE: QRCU has a similar issue. However it overcomes such a race in the reader
by retrying the sampling of its `srcu_idx` equivalent.

Q: If you have to wait for readers of both `srcu_idx = 0`, and `1`, then why
not just have a single counter and do away with the "flipping" logic?

Ans:
Because of updater forward progress. If we had a single counter, then it is
possible that new readers would constantly increment the lock counter, thus
updaters would be waiting all the time. By using the 'flip' logic, we are able
to drain pre-existing readers using the inactive part of `srcu_idx` to be
drained in a bounded time. The number of readers of a 'flipped' part would only
monotonically decrease since new readers go to its counterpart.

2023 update:
I have more detailed notes with diagrams and such on this and other cases. Just
reach out to me if you want to take a look at those.
